Final presentations for the directed reading programme

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Monday, November 25th 5:30-6:35PM in Blocker 220
  and
Monday, December 2nd 5:00-7:00PM in Blocker 220
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Monday, Nov 25
 5:30-5:40PM Food
 5:40-5:55PM Yun Lu
 6:00-6:15PM William Frendreiss
 6:20-6:35PM Braden Yosko

Monday, Dec 2
 5:00-5:15PM Food
 5:20-5:35PM Olumayowa Olowemeye
 5:40-5:55PM Isaac Ray
 6:00-6:15PM Cristian Meraz
 6:20-6:35PM Patrick Maedgen
 6:40-6:55PM Claudio Romero

--------------------------------------------------------------------------
Titles + Abstracts:

Yun Lu: Unsupervised Learning: K-Mean Clustering and Principle Component 
Analysis

As one of the two major task types of machine learning, unsupervised 
learning is different from supervised learning which learns from training 
data containing targets. It focuses solely on discovering pattern in 
unlabeled data set. Two common problems in unsupervised learning are 
clustering problem and dimensionality reduction problem. In the clustering 
problem, using K-Mean algorithm can divide the data sets into several 
groups based on their similarities. K-Mean does not required any external 
information about grouping, and it can find the optimal clustering 
partition by minimizing the within-cluster squared Euclidean distance in 
data set. In dimensionality reduction, algorithm reduces the number of 
features without losing relevant information of original input data set. 
The Principle Component Analysis procedure can be used to solve such 
dimensionality reduction problem.



William Frendreiss: Triangulations and Properties

The purpose of the presentation is to educate the audience about 
properties of triangulations of point configurations and present an 
overview of what the author has studied in the Directed Reading Program 
this semester. The presentation will first begin by defining convex hulls 
before moving to methods of obtaining regular triangulations. Then, 
properties of triangulations (including the Union, Intersection, and 
Closure properties) will be discussed in-depth, with picture examples to 
aid audience comprehension. Finally, the Delaunay triangulation, a 
particular type of Triangulation with interesting properties, is discussed 
and the usefulness of the properties is explored as it relates to other 
applications, especially optimization.



Braden Yosko: Introduction to the Theory of Computation

We will provide a theoretical foundation for mathematical computation; 
discussing both fundamentals from computability theory and basic time 
complexity. Beginning from finite automata and Turing Machines we will 
establish the concept of languages as well as the decidability and 
verifiability of these languages. We will then discuss complexity classes 
and NP-Complete reductions.



Olumayowa Olowemeye: An introduction and application of Topological Data 
Analysis

Our goal is to cluster soccer player based on statistics to find out new 
positions using Topological data analysis. Topological data analysis is a 
method for exploring topological structure underlying the data. I will 
give an overview on topology, persistent homology, and mapper, then 
explain how we analyzed the data.



Isaac Ray: Introduction to Group Theory

A brief introduction to groups including group properties, abstract 
groups, subgroups, generators, and a discussion of the dihedral subgroup 
of S_{4}.



Cristian Meraz: Amenability and the Growth of Groups

Mahlon Day posed the question of whether there existed amenable groups 
outside of the class of elementary amenable groups. Progress made to this 
end translated Day’s question into a problem concerning the growth of 
groups. John Milnor then posed his question on the existence of a finitely 
generated group of intermediate growth, to which our department’s own 
Rostislav Grigorchuk gave a positive response. In this talk, I will give 
an overview of elementary amenable groups and amenability, along with a 
few classical results and examples illuminating a path to the study of the 
growth of groups.



Patrick Maedgen: Elliptic Curve Cryptography

Elliptic curve cryptography is a widely used public key cryptosystem that 
relies on the difficulty of the elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem, 
a variant of the discrete logarithm problem. In this talk, we will define 
the group law for elliptic curves over finite fields, and present a brief 
account of its use in cryptography.



Claudio Romero: Quasi-Isometries Through Milnor-Schwarz Lemma

The Milnor-Schwarz Lemma is commonly called the “fundamental lemma of 
geometric group theory” the reason for this that it links the geometry of 
groups with the geometry of spaces that occur in the natural world. A 
coarse description of the lemma is as follows: If given a pleasant group 
action on a pleasant metric space, then the group is finitely generated 
and quasi-isometric to the metric space. This can be used to understand 
the geometry of a group or determine if a group is finitely generated by 
applying an action on the group on a reasonable metric space. The converse 
is also applicable. If wanting to explain a metric space, we can give a 
simple action on a fundamental or common group. The lemma mostly has 
geometric group and topological applications.

--1537566835-1330590130-1574363086=:12651--

